[Music]
good morning welcome to breakfast with
charlie state and
niagara manchester our headlines today
10 days in a hotel for anyone returning
to the uk
from coronavirus hotspots the government
says the new rules will come into force
a week on monday
more than a thousand passengers a day
flying into places like heathrow
airport are likely to be affected but
critics say
it's too little too late good morning
braced for an
increase in energy bills in the next
hour we'll get confirmation of a rise in
the energy price cap i'll explain what
it could mean for you
looking after children in lockdown we'll
look at the impact
being out of school is having on them
and parents
good morning three premier league
defeats in a row for josie mourinho now
and
spurs yeah they lose at home to chelsea
who continued their good start and a new
boss thomas tuschel
and today snow only really in northern
scotland but over the next few days
we'll see snow more widely
and all of us are going to feel the
bitter chill of an easterly wind i'll
have all the details here
on breakfast
[Music]
good morning it's friday february the
5th our top story today from the
15th of february uk residents returning
from corona virus hotspots abroad
will have to quarantine in hotels for 10
nights now there has been mounting
pressure for ministers to set out
details of the scheme which was first
announced last week
the government has been accused of being
too slow to act
simon jones has more
a new destination for new arrivals from
the most high-risk countries
british nationals returning home from
more than 30 covid hotspots
will have to check into designated
hotels at their own expense
for 10 days is to try to stop the spread
of new variants of the virus
which emerged in south africa and brazil
but labour says because quarantine
hotels won't be introduced for another
10 days
lives will be put at risk it is utterly
shambolic that this is being brought
into effect on the 15th of february
that's over 50 days since the south
african strain was first discovered in
this country and little wonder frankly
that it reached our shores it is
nearly a year since hotel quarantining
was
introduced in other countries we are in
a race against time quarantine hotels
are expected to be set up in 10
locations near ports and airports
hotel owners will be asked to provide
rooms for more than a thousand new
people every day
with guests expected to pay around 80
pounds a night
if anyone wants to leave their room for
fresh air they'll be accompanied by
security
the government insists it's working at
pace when you set up a new system of
hotel based quarantine
we want to make sure that we get this
right so that when people go to those
hotels
the hotels are in place the transport is
in place but it really is important to
remember
that it is already the case that
everybody must quarantine
for 10 days that's required by law
discussions have already taken place
with more than 60 companies in the hotel
and travel industries
but some hotel owners say they've been
kept in the dark
the government says the uk has one of
the toughest border regimes in the world
but thousands of passengers will
continue to arrive from hotspots
before the new policy becomes a reality
simon jones bbc news now let's get more
from our reporter simon jones who's
outside heathrow airport this morning
simon this has been
long spoken about we know now a week on
monday
is the date practically what does this
mean
well there are lots of hotels
surrounding hito airport like this one
and many of those hotels are going to be
brought into service
by the government for quarantine hotels
for british people
arriving at airports like heathrow who
need
to spend these 10 days in quarantine
how is it going to work well the idea is
that passengers will be escorted
from the airport to the hotels they'll
be taken
to their rooms they'll be expected to
spend their 10 days
largely in their rooms if they need to
leave for a bit of fresh air
or maybe for a cigarette they will be
escorted by security
once again now the government first put
forward this idea towards the end of
last month but then it all went
a bit quite it almost seemed like the
idea itself had been put into quarantine
but now after some pressure we know it
will be the middle of this month that
this
all begins the government says it's been
talking to its counterparts in australia
and new zealand where they've been using
the system for many months but the
criticism is well this
is all a bit late simon okay thanks very
much simon jones there for us
hospital an air show was placed in
lockdown last night as police dealt with
what they described
as three serious incidents ambulances
were diverted during the three-hour
lockdown
of university hospital cross house in
kilmarnock the incidents
are not being treated as terror related
president biden has declared that
diplomacy is back and the united states
will rebuild alliances in his first
major
foreign policy speech mr biden said
problems such as climate change
and armed conflicts could be solved only
by working with other nations
he also warned russia that it would face
a much more robust relationship with the
us
donald trump has said he will not
testify at his senate a pinchwood trial
which happens next week a statement
from his lawyers described the
proceedings as unconstitutional
and said he would not voluntarily give
evidence democrats accused the former
president
inciting insurrection over the attack on
the capitol building last month
now the families of some of the hundreds
of patients who died in a hampshire
hospital
after being given dangerous levels of
powerful painkillers
are calling for new inquests into their
deaths it follows an inquiry
two years ago which found that more than
450 patients at gosport war memorial
hospital
had their lives shortened by the drugs
and the charges have ever been brought
lawyers for the families have lodged
official requests in the hope of setting
up a wide-ranging inquest
to investigate all the individuals and
agencies involved
and to consider the causes of death
which could include anything from
natural causes
to unlawful killing duncan kennedy has
more
for 23 years charles farving and his
wife anne have asked questions
about the gospel war memorial hospital
charles's stepfather brian died after
being given powerful
opiate drugs there which charles says
has never been explained
harrowing quite frankly
feeling the system is not there to to
help
it's been actually obstructing the
progress towards justice
in the 1990s hundreds of patients at the
hospital were put on the powerful
painkillers
two years ago a bishop-led inquiry found
that 456 patients had their lives
shortened by the drugs now lawyers for
some of the families
say it's time for a hillsborough style
inquest to reveal
what went on what we're eventually
hoping to trigger
is that the chief coroner will agree
that
that inquest should be held that they
should be held together
that they should be judge-led and there
should be a jury
dr jame barton oversaw the
administration of drugs at the hospital
but she said she'd been a hard-working
doctor doing her best for patients
relatives are also waiting for a police
inquiry to conclude
detectives are looking into the cases of
around 700 patients who are at this
hospital
and to see whether any criminal charges
will be brought in this case
it may take months for families to hear
if they will get a new judge-led inquest
but say this is their last hope for
justice duncan kennedy bbc news
in gospel almost 12 million people in
the uk are vulnerable
to future heat waves and flooding caused
by global warming that's according to
campaigners the elderly and those with
underlying health conditions such as
heart disease are particularly
at risk charlotte wright reports
summer heat waves may seem like a
distant memory
but scenes like this are becoming more
common in the uk
as temperatures warm around the world
and when it comes to the nation's health
some say that's a cause for concern 12
million people within the uk are
vulnerable
to extreme weather events those are
being exacerbated by climate change
we must take action now to tackle the
health of our planet
and that will help our human health the
warning comes from a group of more than
140 organizations
including wwf the national trust and
women's institute
who have formed the climate coalition
data collated by the group shows
heat-related mortality among the over
65s increased by 21
between 2004 and 2018. it warns it could
affect millions more of the elderly or
clinically vulnerable in years to come
though it doesn't mention cold related
deaths which the government says
represent the biggest weather-related
source of mortality
it's not just temperatures the report
predicts around 2.6 million people could
be living in areas with a significant
risk of flooding within the next two
decades
which it says can have a severe mental
health impact
saying almost one in three of those
affected suffer from post-traumatic
stress disorder
now the group is calling on the
government to take more ambitious steps
to deal with the issue
the government says the uk is a global
leader in tackling climate change
becoming the first major economy to
commit to reaching net
zero emissions by 2050 charlotte wright
bbc news
the duchess of cambridge has praised
teachers for being a lifeline to
families and has urged them to look
after themselves during the pandemic
she made the comments during a series of
video calls
with teachers and staff and cathy durham
who've been taking classes for the
children of key workers
and supporting home learning you're
doing a most amazing job your lifeline
to so many families out there
um so well done i know it takes an awful
lot of effort energy
patience um but uh
a huge a huge thank you not only for
your time today but also for the
for the hard work you do on a day-to-day
basis for the children that you look
after
i love the decorations in the background
always good to notice the background i
know what we do
because you're in places you wouldn't
normally be and then you sort of just
get little glitches
inside it's lovely
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app and get
the full story with bbc
dot co dot uk forward slash news follow
the story for all the latest with bbc
news